# Data Analysis Using Raven Pro
## Introduction
Raven Pro is sotware developed by Cornell University for the analysis of bioacoustic data. Raven Pro uses machine learning models to automatically identify specific sounds or vocalizations in audio recordings. This document describes the use of Raven Pro to analyze audio data generated by the HD Mountains Mexican Spotted Owl project.

## Prepare the audio files
**Windows**: Place the **_make_listfile_WAV.bat** file in the folder containing data recordings (for example, **MSO23-1_000**). Doubleclick the bat file to generate a list of audio file paths.

**Mac or Linux**: Create a new folder in a convenient location and move all audio files into that folder.


## Open the audio files in Raven Pro
**Windows**: Open Raven Pro then drop the listfile created previously on to the Raven Pro window.

**Mac or Linux**: Open Raven Pro, then go to the *File* menu and select *Open Audio Files*. Navigate to the folder you created in the previous step and select all files in the folder. Click *OK*.

## Begin analysis
1. In the **Configure New Sound** window, select **Page Sound** with default values. Click **OK**.


2. Uncheck the waveform view in the sidebar.


3. Go to the **Tools** menu and select **Detectors > Learning Detector**. In the dialog box, double-click **Waveform1(Sound1)** in the right-hand column so it appears under the **Required Inputs** column at left. Click **OK**.


4. In the **Configure Machine Learning Detector** dialog box, select the  **Inputs** tab and then select **BirdNET_GLOBAL_3K_V2*2** from the **Model** menu.


5. On the **Outputs** tab, select **birds_north_america.csv**.


6. Click the **Suppress All** button just above the **Suppress** column in the bird list.


7. Click on the **Common Name** column header to sort by common name.


8. Find "Barred Owl" in the list and uncheck its **Suppress** box. Do the same for "Spotted Owl". Click **OK**.


The detector will start running. It may take several hours for the detector to finish depending on the speed of your computer and the amount of data you are analyzing. **Finish Time**, displayed in the Progress Manager, provides an estimate of when the analysis will be complete.


## Review and save results of analysis
1. When the detector has finished, click **Close** in the **Progress Manager** window.


2. Any detections will appear in the selection table at the bottom of the Raven Pro window. Right-click on the header row of the selection table and select **Choose Measurements…** . Find **Begin File** in the right column, then double-click it so that it appears in the left column. Click **OK**.


3. If the detector reports any hits, click on **Score** in the header row to sort hits by score.


4. Right-click on the **Learning Detector** tab and select **Save Table**. By default the selection table will be saved to the **Selections** folder in the Raven Pro folder on your computer. Click **Save**.


## Interpret Raven Pro results
The fact that Raven Pro reports it has detected a vocalization does not guarantee that an actual vocalization was recorded. All detector hits must be confirmed manually. The value in the Score column indicates how closely the selection matches the detector's model for the vocalization. Higher score values indicate a closer match to the detector's model. However, the score should not be interpreted as the probability that Raven Pro correctly identified the vocalization. Therefore, all detections must be reviewed manually to determine whether they are valid.

1. Make sure the selection table is sorted by score and then inspect hits in decreasing order of score.

2. Click on the *Score* value for a hit in the selection table. A section of the spectrogram will be selected.

3. Click the *Play* button (or select *Play* from the *Play* menu) to play the sound contained in the selection. Often the selection in the selection table will be very short; it may be helpful to manually create a larger selection that includes sound before and after the selection indicated in the selection table. Create the selection by clicking and dragging on the spectrogram to create a rectangle containing the original hit. Click the *Play* button to listen to the selection. You can press the *Delete* button on your keyboard to remove the selection when you are finished reviewing it.
